---
layout: post
category: Startups
title: Why Teespring matters
---

E-commerce is taking over the world. There is no better evidence than
the astonishing number put out by the e-commerce juggernaut Tmall
today: In just about 38 minutes after it kicked start the double 11
shopping carnival, the Chinese equivalent of Black Friday, it has
already handled its first 10 billion RMB (1.63 billion USD) worth of
transactions, setting a new world record with huge margin.

E-commerce is also growing at a breathtaking speed. According to the
following graph taken from [Economist](www.economist.com), the total
online sales in China is expected to hit 460 billion dollars in 2015,
a 50% increase from 2013.

![ecommerce growth]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/ecommerce-rate-growth.png)

E-commerce is the manifestation of internet as a democratizing
force. It empowers people who could have been put off by the daunting
task of setting up a business to pursuit their dreams because it's so
much easier to build a storefront and sell to the rest of the world
online. It enables fairer and easier access of information for
consumers so that overall they could enjoy better products with lower
price, even in places where the growth rate of physical shops can't
keep up with people's purchasing power. It bridges buyers and sellers 
who otherwise would never have their roads crossed. It promotes finer
division of labor, thus facilitates innovation and produces better
efficiency.

The last point contributes immensely to the prosperity of the online
business. E-commerce giants such as Tmall has done a great job at
taking some of the tedious tasks such as store building, payment and
distribution away from merchants so that they can focus more on what
they are really good at: making products and sell them. Sites like
[Teespring](http://www.teespring.com/) goes even further than that. By
enabling merchants to sell their designs (using Tshirt as medium) more
efficiently and at larger scale, it removes the burden of
manufacturing from them as well. When ideas are the only
differentiator for a product, it encourages more innovative in the
area of design and marketing. As the result of that, manufacturing
could be made more efficient as well.

I call this Manufacturing as a Service (MaaS) and believe that it has a
bright future. Not all products fall into the category where its
manufacturing can be completely outsourced. However sites like
[Teespring](http://www.teespring.com/) point out a possible direction
for the future of E-commerce: if we abstract away more pain points for
both the merchants and consumers, good things will happen.
