---
layout: post
category: Software, functional programming, scala
title: The tale of the flatMap
---

#### Background

There is a reason why `flatMap` and its cousin `map` deserves a special place in the Scala folklore. It all starts from the [combinator pattern](https://wiki.haskell.org/Combinator_pattern) popularized by the functional programming paradigm, which according to its definition, is "a style of organizing libraries centered around the idea of combining things". In this design pattern, there are usually a few ways to construct some primitive values of type `T` and a few `combinators` (functions) which can combine values of type `T` to build up more complex values of type `T`. Proponents of the combinator pattern argue that it promotes modularity and composibility of the program.

Many real world libraries are built using the combinator pattern, including the Scala [collection](https://www.scala-lang.org/api/2.12.3/scala/collection/index.html) and [parser combinator](http://www.scala-lang.org/api/2.12.3/scala-parser-combinators/scala/util/parsing/combinator/Parsers.html), [Dataset](https://spark.apache.org/docs/2.1.0/api/java/org/apache/spark/sql/Dataset.html) in Spark, [Queries](http://slick.lightbend.com/doc/3.2.1/queries.html) in Slick and many domain specific languages (DSLs).

If someone wants to leverage the combinator pattern, the challenge is to come up with both the type `T` and a set of combinators for `T` to encapsulate whatever computation the author wants to express. If the computation happens to be sequential by nature, that is where `Monad` comes in handy.

There might be a lot of fuzz about `Monad`, but it is not much more than a type `T` with a few pre-defined `combinator` interfaces. At a high level, it allows us to 1) write a description of a computation and 2) have *a way* to apply a pure function to the result of the previous computation and transform it into the description of the next computation. With these two weapons at disposal, we can then take an initial description of the computation and sequentially transform it into the final description of the computation by applying a series of pure functions to it. As we can see here, the key of this programs approach is how these pure functions get applied. `flatMap` defines exactly that.

In fact, sequential compuation are so common that `Monad` becomes the basis of many types that try to leverage the combinator pattern, to the point where many languages provide syntactic sugar to make the chaining of `flatMaps` seem less nested and more pleasant for eyes. In Scala, the keyword is `for`.


#### flatMap in different context

##### List

Let's look at `flatMap` in the context of a Scala `List`.

{% highlight scala linenos=table %}

scala> List(1, 2, 3).flatMap { i =>
     |   List(4, 5, 6).map { j =>
     |     (i, j)
     |   }
     | }
res0: List[(Int, Int)] = List((1,4), (1,5), (1,6), (2,4), (2,5), (2,6), (3,4), (3,5), (3,6))

{% endhighlight %}

If we change `flatMap` to `map` in the above example, the result would have been

{% highlight scala linenos=table %}

res0: List[List[(Int, Int)]] = List(List((1,4), (1,5), (1,6)), List((2,4), (2,5), (2,6)), List((3,4), (3,5), (3,6)))

{% endhighlight %}

The intuition here seems to be simple, `flatMap` maps first and then flattens out the resulting nested list.

But if we think further, what kind of computation does `List[Int]` really encapsulate? One way of looking at it is that a `List[T]` represents something that has multiple but equally possible values. For example, `List(1, 2, 3)` could be considered as *one* value with `1/3` chance of being `1`, `2` and `3` respectively. What `flatMap` does in the above example is that it combines elements in two list into a list of tuples with respect to the possibilities of each tuple being the potential value of it. e.g. `(1, 4)` has `1/9` of the chance of being the result of the final list because `1` and `4` both has `1/3` of the chance of being the value of the first and second list respectively.

If we re-write the above example with `for` syntax, that is where the feelings of a loop in an imperative language gets implemented with Monadic List semantics.

{% highlight scala linenos=table %}

scala> for {
     |   i <- List(1, 2, 3)
     |   j <- List(4, 5, 6)
     | } yield (i, j)
res2: List[(Int, Int)] = List((1,4), (1,5), (1,6), (2,4), (2,5), (2,6), (3,4), (3,5), (3,6))

{% endhighlight %}

Fun fact, someone actually implemented a [special list](http://eed3si9n.com/learning-scalaz/Making+monads.html) where elements do not have the equal possibility of being the potential value.

##### Option

`Option[T]` represents a value that may or may not exist. Compared to `List[T]`, the semantics of the `flatMap` in the context of `Option[T]` is to skip the rest of the computation and return `None` directly if the result of the previous computation is `None`, otherwise continue the computation. The definition of `flatMap` for Scala `Option` is pretty straightforward:

{% highlight scala linenos=table %}

@inline final def flatMap[B](f: A => Option[B]): Option[B] =
  if (isEmpty) None else f(this.get)

{% endhighlight %}

##### Future

`Future[T]` represents a value that will be available in the future, the semantics of the `flatMap` in the context of `Future[T]` is to basically wait until the value of the previous future becomes available and then pass it along to the next future. Essentially executing a list of futures in sequence. Any exceptions along the way will pop up in the resulting Future as well.

{% highlight scala linenos=table %}

def flatMap[S](f: T => Future[S])(implicit executor: ExecutionContext): Future[S] = transformWith {
  case Success(s) => f(s)
  case Failure(_) => this.asInstanceOf[Future[S]]
}

{% endhighlight %}

##### Either and Validation

`Either[Err, T]` is sometimes referred to as error monad, it is one the ways in which functional programming simulate exception handling. The `flatMap` semantics in the context of `Either[Err, T]` is similiar to `Option[T]` in that it will skip the rest of the computation if error occurs. The difference is that `Option[T]` represents all the error cases as `None`, whereas `Either[Err, T]` goes a bit further by representing them using type `Err`. Here is an example (Scala 2.12+):

{% highlight scala linenos=table %}

scala> :paste
// Entering paste mode (ctrl-D to finish)

import scala.util.Try

val zeroE: Either[Throwable, Int] = Right(0)
val oneE: Either[Throwable, Int] = Right(10)
val twoE: Either[Throwable, Int] = Right(2)

val result: Either[Throwable, Int] = for {
  one          <- oneE
  two          <- twoE
  divideByZero <- Try { one / 0 }.toEither
} yield divideByZero + two

// Exiting paste mode, now interpreting.

import scala.util.Try
zeroE: Either[Throwable,Int] = Right(0)
oneE: Either[Throwable,Int] = Right(10)
twoE: Either[Throwable,Int] = Right(2)
result: Either[Throwable,Int] = Left(java.lang.ArithmeticException: / by zero)

{% endhighlight %}


`Either[Err, T]` is useful our error handling strategy is to halt the execution and return whatever the error is. If we wanna go a bit further than that and collect all the errors that have happened during the entire execution, we can use the `Validation` monad. `Validation` monad is not part of the Scala standard library, [here](http://eed3si9n.com/learning-scalaz/Validation.html) is an example in [Scalaz](https://github.com/scalaz/scalaz).

##### State

`State[S, T]` monad is a way of simulating global mutable state in functional programming. The most concise way of demonstrating the semantics of `flatMap` in this context is the following piece of Haskell code:

{% highlight haskell linenos=table %}

(>>=) :: State s a -> (a -> State s b) -> State s b
(act1 >>= fact2) s = runState act2 is
    where (iv,is) = runState act1 s
          act2 = fact2 iv

{% endhighlight %}

`>>=` is `flatMap` in Haskell term. Essentially, `flatMap` applies a pure function to the result of the previous computation: `iv`, and also passes along the updated state `is`. In this way, it gives the feeling of a mutable global state, but what really happens is that a new updated state is created and passed along for every `flatMap` invocation.

The following is an example of `State[S, T]` monad in `cats` library.

{% highlight scala linenos=table %}

scala> :paste
// Entering paste mode (ctrl-D to finish)

import cats._, cats.data._, cats.implicits._

type Stack = List[Int]
val pop = State[Stack, Int] {
  case x :: xs => (xs, x)
  case Nil     => sys.error("stack is empty")
}

def push(a: Int) = State[Stack, Unit] {
  case xs => (a :: xs, ())
}

def stackManip: State[Stack, Int] = for {
  _ <- push(3)
  a <- pop
  b <- pop
} yield(b)

stackManip.run(List(5, 8, 2, 1)).value

// Exiting paste mode, now interpreting.

import cats._
import cats.data._
import cats.implicits._
defined type alias Stack
pop: cats.data.State[Stack,Int] = cats.data.StateT@43944da8
push: (a: Int)cats.data.State[Stack,Unit]
stackManip: cats.data.State[Stack,Int]
res1: (Stack, Int) = (List(8, 2, 1),5)

{% endhighlight %}

`stackManip` demonstrates the state manipulation in the imperative programming style.

#### Roll your own type that supports the for syntax

`for` in Scala is syntactic suger, which means that they are expanded at the parser phase during compilation.

{% highlight bash linenos=table %}

➜  mina scalac -Xshow-phases
    phase name  id  description
    ----------  --  -----------
        parser   1  parse source into ASTs, perform simple desugaring

               .....

{% endhighlight %}

Simply speaking, when compiler stumbles upon a `for` expression, it converts mostly using `flatMap`, `map`, `withFilter`, etc.

Take the following example:

{% highlight scala linenos=table %}

for {
    i <- Some(1)
    j <- Some(2) if j > 0
} yield i + j

{% endhighlight %}

If we click "Desugar scala code..." in Intellij, it will be desugared into the following code.

{% highlight scala linenos=table %}

Some.apply(1).flatMap((i: Int) => Some.apply(2).withFilter((j: Int) => j.>(0)).map((j: Int) => i.+(j)))

{% endhighlight %}

As we can see, `for` is transformed into a series of `flatMap` with a `map` at the end. Conditionals are translated into `withFilter` method.

If we want to write a type that supports the `for` syntax, we just need to implement `flatMap` and `map` function for it. Conditionals is only possible when `withFilter` is implemented as well.
