---
layout: post
category: Philosophy
title: Divergence of Desires
---

If we were to build a specie that would survive and prosper within a
dynamic enironment of arbitrary complexity, one of the design choices
we have to make is whether we should build a finite number of powerful
enough individuals who can last "forever" or start with a dynamic set
of significantly weaker individuals who can constantly adapt to the
environment through the mechanisms of micro-adjustment and iterations.

If we know all the details of the environment from now until infinity
with all the possible permutations and understand in general how to
build materialistic things that would last forever, designing
individuals that are powerful enough to overcome all the future
adversities might be a viable solution. Unfortunately, neither of
these assumptions are true, therefore designing a specie comprised
of more adaptive individuals and maintain its continuity through
iterations is a unwilling acknowledgement to the fact that nobody
poccesses perfect information and knows how to build perfect beings.

How to implement adaptation and iteration as a specie architect?
[Darwin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Darwin) and
[Freud](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sigmund_Freud)'s work over the
years might offer us some inspirations. At the specie level, we can use
genetic mutation as raw material and iterate upon it through the
mechanisms of death and reproduction to eventually achieve adapation. At
individual level, carefully engineered desires can be instilled in
such a way that their satisifaction would collectively fulfill the
design goals of the entire specie without individuals neccessarily
understanding the connections. In reality, many well engineered systems
have achieved their sophisticated design goals through having "dumb"
individuals interacting with each other within an incentive structure
fueled by individual desires, notable examples include
[mouse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mouse), [market
economy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_economy) and
[Bitcoin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitcoin).  As the specie
engineer, how to weave individual desires into an incentive structure
which can help the overall long term propsperity is the
trickiest part of the business. Note that this wouldn't be an issue
had we mastered the competence to build perfect individuals that can
last forever, since in a static system like that, goals are inherently
aligned at both individual and specie level without requiring any
incentive structures.

At this point, we should start to appreciate the ingenuity and
thoughtfulness that went into the design and engineering of human
being as a specie. The desire for survival is built deeply within us to
counteract our inevitable demise, stretching a blank canvas where our
colorful lives can all be painted. Reproduction is driven largely by
sexual desire, giving us resilience against the ever changing
environment. A web of desires are derived either directly or
indirectly from these two fundamental ones, which together govern
our behavior. Once we were deployed to the wild, the constant struggle
to satisfy various desires in a competitive and often adversarial
environment help foster intelligence, rational thinking and grow even
more desires. So far, the prosperity of human being as a specie seems
to have proven that those designs worked really well.

However, like many other tools in the repertoire of a specie engineer,
desire can be a double edged sword with unintended consequences. For
example, one of the more fundamental human desires, according to [René
Girard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ren%C3%A9_Girard), is [mimetic
desire](https://www.iep.utm.edu/girard/#H2). We can at least partially
attribute our success as a specie so far to our significantly better
mimetic capability compared to other species, which is the basic
mechanism of learning. This subconcious imitation of each other not
only allows us to copy the positive attributes from our role models
but also mirror desires, good and bad, from each other. Usually, a large
part of our desire towards an object is based on the fact that it is
also desirable by others. When this object is scarce, it brews mutual
animosity which René called "mimetic rivalry". Because of this,
societies throughout human history all have the tendency to grow
uncontrolled mass violence towards each
other. [Scapegoating](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scapegoating) (or
other form of sacrifices) is one mechanism that was discovered by
archaeologists in almost all parts of the world to help communities
channel internal group violence into a more controlled form to reduce
damages. Later on, the concept of marriage, religion or even country
all offer solutions in one way or another to alleviate this problem,
or else we as a specie could be destroyed by the unintended side
effects of the very desire that contributes enormously to our success. Even now, many
of world's most severe and urgent issues that could potentially
jeapardize the future of humanity are either caused or escalated by
mimetic rivaries. Our inability to come up with solutions to them
seems to suggest that some of the desires that served us well at
earlier stages of the human development might at later stages stopped
being the net contributor to the continuation of human race any more.

Even though the importance of the collective desires can not be
overstated, desires at individual level are supposed to have very
little significance at the macro level, very much like the effect of a
vote in a referendum. This way, it systematically reduces the
potential damages caused by outliers, allowing more room for grassroot
experimentation without putting the entire race in jeapardy. However,
with the advent of "asymmetric technologies" such as encryption,
artificial intelligence, portable weapon of mass destruction,
blockchain and various other human enhancement technologies, we
started to see a trend where individuals are gaining more and more
leverage over the fate of human race. With the acceleration of
technological advancement and human's obsession over self sovereignty
and enhancement, it places a ever growing systematic risk to our very
own existence. At some point, even if only 10k of the most elite
subset of the population poccess technologies that could destroy
humanity, we could already calculate the probabilities of that
actually happening based on the likelihood of mental illness and self
destructive behaviour, etc. As a chinese proverb says, 'clever people
may be the victims of their own cleverness' (聪明反被聪明误), human
race might eventually be the victims of our own individual
empowerment.

We are also self aware of desires, and we will fix them
self aware of desire, human are smart enough to manipulate desires now. in the old times it
is through reducing desires (buddism), nowadays people might just
start to do things to satisify it directly, more and more.


, it was clearly not her intention if the
design goal is the long term propsperity of the entire specie.
compounded

1) unintended consequences, bad, might cause demise
2) what if we satisfy our desires
3) desire shall be insignificant at the individual level

Tipping point in the history of human beings where this is happening.