---
layout: post
category: Philosophy
title: Some Challenges of Freedom of Speech
---

If there exists a superintelligence system that can take in all the
information in the world and process it with the most "optimal"
algorithm (whatever that means), perhaps planned economy would be a
better mechanism for resource allocation and growth generation than
market economy. Similiarly, if we were blessed with a
superintelligence that possesses all the knowledge and truth of the
world, perhaps all we should do is to shut up and listen, if our goal
is to use whatever means appropriate to advance society a whole rather
than protecting the holiness of any particular concept, in this case
freedom of speech.

Unfortunately, this superintelligence doesn't exist, at least not
yet. History seems to have shown repeatedly that no matter how wise
and well intended an individual or a group of individuals are, it is
difficult for mere mortals to be the guardian of information for
everybody without suffocating the society. On top of that, such power
almost always leads to Orwellian like state: Power corrupts; absolute
power corrupts absolutely.

From the societal perspective, if the goals of freedom of speech is to
continuously generate ideas based on new circumstances so that
humanity can be equipped with more knowledge and societies can evolve
from one consensus to the next, then it has done a remarkable job so
far. It encourages the contribution from individuals with different
skillsets and perspectives; It provides a market place where ideas can
be challenged, debated and tested; It also protects the "unorthodox"
ideas from being suppressed by the powerful status quo consensus. At a
higher level, it is a dynamic, decentralized, bottom up approach to
achieve collective goals, analogous to biological evolution or market
economy in their respective domains.

However, information has some interesting properties. One of them is
that the cost of verification is asymmetrically higher than the cost
of generation. This might not be very obvious before the age of Web
2.0, when both information generation and distribution were still
controlled by mainstream medias. In that era, the flow of information
within society was still relatively simple due to its largely
hierachical nature. The media outlets basically took on the
responsibility to verify and filter their contents for their
audiences. However, in the past 15 years or so, new technologies such
as social media platforms have essentially democratized the ability to
generate and distribute information. Putting aside the benefits this
must have created for a moment, with the explosion of user generated
content and the flow of information that is orders of magnitude more
complex, the overall cost of information verification at the societal
level must have skyrocketed. This puts companies such as Facebook in
an extremely tough spot. With billions of users from different
countries, the sheer amount of information that needs to be moderated
as well its complexity is astonishing. 

The question is: should they play the role of truth arbiter? If they
should, can they theoretically and practically keep up with the
continued explosion of information when it has such an inherent
asymmetric property? If they shouldn't, what is the effect of forcing
this responsibility to the individuals when most people neither have
the time nor expertise to sufficiently identify misinformation? When
freedom of speech is enhanced so much by technology, it seems logical
that more moderating (i.e. censoring) needs to happen somewhere in the
information flow to keep the verification cost in check and prevent
the overall quality of the information from decaying. Who should do
that? To which extent should they do that?  Is this against the very
spirit of freedom of speech?

Another property of information is that it thrives in big networks and
therefore creates network effect. If there are many diversified,
competing platforms that people can easily migrate, these platforms
could compete on the ways that the information is moderated and
probably wouldn't cause significant issues at the societal level. The
problem is that due to the network effect, we end up with a handful
very large and powerful ones that are not diversified enough when
it comes to information moderation, which poses systematic threat to
the freedom of speech. These companies are also dorminated by similiar
business models: harvest user data, create [echo
chambers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Echo_chamber_(media)) to
increase the stickiness of the platform and make money by selling ads
to the users. Freedom of speech includes the freedom to hear. These
profit oriented algorithms implicitly impose constrains to the flow of
information and have profound impact to the quality of the information
we consume. "Garbage in, Garbage out". The implication of this to the
quality of the democracy over the long run remains to be seen.


<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/echo-chamber.png" alt="Echo Chamber" style="width: 42%;"/><br/>
<span class="image-label">Media Echo Chamber, [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Echo_chamber_(media))</span>

Even though the quality of information is crucial to the quality of
democracy and there is a risk that the ads model is fundamentally
incompatible with societies' larger goals. It seems that the industry
still struggles to find a good replacement for it. Ads model has an
ingenious property that is often underappreciated: it is [incentive
compatible](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incentive_compatibility) for
most of the participants within the system. Majority of the users
always prefer convenience and immediate economic benefits. A "free"
product paid by your attention instead of money wins the
usability battle at least with the current state of the technology.


Another threat to freedom of speech is the extent to which its
alternative models can succeed, even temporarily. Human societies have
gone through times where there were explosions of scientific and
technological breakthroughs. However, other parts of the human history
is filled with incremental improvements or even staganation. Freedom
of speech as an idea generation and selection mechanism is much more
valuable in periods of breakthoughs. Arguments can be made that
science has been staganating in the past 40 years and we are just
reaping the benefits from the research done by the generations before
that. It is unclear if this is temporary or how long this would
last. Under this assumption, societies emphasizing more on freedom of
speech might not get enough benefits for its cost, whereas countries
that actively censor information might be able to reach social
consensus much more effectively without incuring an unbearable cost of
losing the battle of innovation. Of course, this dynamic could change
in different circumstances, perhaps this is one of the hidden forces
that can influence the rise and falls of the civilizations that focus
more on individualism vs collectivism.

<br/>

How many
[flowers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hundred_Flowers_Campaign)
should be let bloom?


