---
layout: post
category: Blockchain, Web3
title: Web3 and Advertising
---

[Marc Andreessen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marc_Andreessen)
famously attributes the proliferation of internet advertising today to
browser's lack of built-in payment support from the beginning. He
calls it the **origin sin of the internet**. The downstream from
advertising, he argues, is everything people are anxious and worked up
about today: privacy, user data collection, misalignment of the
incentives, etc. The assumption is that if crypto were around in the
early internet, it would be much easier to incorporate financial
transactions into the browser and the landscape of the internet
economy could look vastly different compared to what we've seen today.

In general, advertisement has a negative connotation in the Web3
community.  It represents a "legacy" business model from the web2 era
that web3 is set out to disrupt. Sovereign individuals in the next
stage of the internet evolution are supposed to not only take back the
control of money but personal data as well. With the help of
blockchain technologies, new waves of web3 applications will finally
be able to deliver on products that align incentives, respect privacy,
promote economic fairness with superior user experience. Isn't that
great?

The reality is that a class of existing web3 projects struggle to find
sustainable business models. Many projects (especially some of the
X2Earn ones) rely on Ponzi tokenomics where earnings of the
participants come from the funds collected from the new
investors. When no new speculative capital flows into the system,
party stops and the project goes into death spiral. Web3 projects,
like any projects, **needs external source of revenue** to maintain
a sustainable token economy.

Advertising should be appreciated more despite many of its real
issues. Some of internet's most important "common goods" are funded
directly or indirectly by advertising: search engine, social networks,
browsers, public town halls (e.g. twitter), etc. One thing in common
about these services is that their usage are typically
non-transactional: "pay per use" model introduces friction and
negatively impacts their user experience. Subscription model fixes
some of the issues, but as Vitalik [pointed
out](https://twitter.com/VitalikButerin/status/992068638982238208),
adverising is in some cases a superior model: it massively improves
accessibility to a large portion of the population who are unable or
unwilling to pay by providing free (in money term) products . It
accomplishes near-perfect price discrimination where the price of
users' attention is usually proportional to their income. Without
advertising or similar mechanisms, it is unclear if the Web3 version
of the "common goods" such as social network could reach similar level
of mass adoption as its Web2 predecessors.

Advertising played a crucial role in Web2 also because people's
attention is one of the rare mechanisms that naturally bridges the
online/offline world. Another example of such bridges is Bitcoin's
revolutionary [PoW](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_work)
algorithm: an onchain hash that meets the difficulty target
mathematically demonstrates the burning of certain amount of energy
offchain. This allows Bitcoin to programtically control participants'
behavior and established a vibrant ecosystem (both on and off chain)
around it. Similiarly, leveraging people's attention allows a class of
online services such as search engines and social networks to trigger
both online and offline economic activities in a relatively easy and
scalable way, which is crucial for generating revenues. That is why I
believe even without its origin sin, advertising would still have been
one of the most important business models on the internet. It existed
in the age of newspapers and it will continue to exist in the era of
Web3.

How advertising would play out in Web3 is a question worth
exploring. The airdropped tokens and NFTs are certainly a form of
advertising since it demands attention and incentizes certain
measurable behaviors. Crypto wallets and
[DID](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/) has the potential to expand ads
from pure impressions to rich and interoperable objects. Self custody
of identity and personal data in combination with well designed
tokenomic systems and crypto primitives such as [zero knowledge
proofs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-knowledge_proof) might
offer new ideas as to how advertising could be done in a fairer and
more private way. The design and tradeoff space is massive, hopefully
a better form of advertising can come out of the Web3 movement that
addresses most of the current issues while preserving its enormous
benefits.

Advertising in Web3 also has the potential to make new positive impact
to the world. For example, the financial component of Web3 is a great
tool to incentive human behavior that in accumulation has obvious long
term benefits but unmeasurable immediate benefits. That includes
health, environmental protection, fundamental research, etc. With the
right tokenomics design, Web3 projects can incentive such behaviors
and build a community around it while leveraging Web3 version of the
advertising as the mechanism to keep the tokenomics sustainable. A
coherent community with a common goal might also be a valuable target
for like-minded merchants. Advertising helped us fund many "common
goods" in the past, it could continue help us fund new types of "common
goods" in the future with new set of tools and technologies.

In summary, advertising should not be distained by the Web3 community,
it is just a tool that can be improved and leveraged to the benefit of
Web3!
